.Dd 2021-12-19
.Dt LIBGRAPHEME 7
.Os suckless.org
.Sh NAME
.Nm libgrapheme
.Nd unicode library
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In grapheme.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
library provides functions to properly handle user-perceived characters
.Dq ( grapheme clusters ,
see
.Sx MOTIVATION )
according to the Unicode specification.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr grapheme_decode_utf8 3 ,
.Xr grapheme_encode_utf8 3 ,
.Xr grapheme_is_character_break 3 ,
.Xr grapheme_next_character_break 3
.Sh STANDARDS
.Nm
is compliant with the Unicode 14.0.0 specification.
.Sh MOTIVATION
The idea behind every character encoding scheme like ASCII or Unicode
is to express abstract characters (which can be thought of as shapes
making up a written language). ASCII for instance, which comprises the
range 0 to 127, assigns the number 65 (0x41) to the abstract character
.Sq A .
This number is called a
.Dq codepoint ,
and all codepoints of an encoding make up its so-called
.Dq code space .
.Pp
Unicode's code space is much larger, ranging from 0 to 0x10FFFF, but its
first 128 codepoints are identical to ASCII's. The additional code
points are needed as Unicode's goal is to express all writing systems
of the world.
To give an example, the abstract character
.Sq \[u00C4]
is not expressable in ASCII, given no ASCII codepoint has been assigned
to it.
It can be expressed in Unicode, though, with the codepoint 196 (0xC4).
.Pp
One may assume that this process is straightfoward, but as more and
more codepoints were assigned to abstract characters, the Unicode
Consortium (that defines the Unicode standard) was facing a problem:
Many (mostly non-European) languages have such a large amount of
abstract characters that it would exhaust the available Unicode code
space if one tried to assign a codepoint to each abstract character.
The solution to that problem is best introduced with an example: Consider
the abstract character
.Sq \[u01DE] ,
which is
.Sq A
with an umlaut and a macron added to it.
In this sense, one can consider
.Sq \[u01DE]
as a two-fold modification (namely
.Dq add umlaut
and
.Dq add macron )
of the
.Dq base character
.Sq A .
.Pp
The Unicode Consortium adapted this idea by assigning codepoints to
modifications.
For example, the codepoint 0x308 represents adding an umlaut and 0x304
represents adding a macron, and thus, the codepoint sequence
.Dq 0x41 0x308 0x304 ,
namely the base character
.Sq A
followed by the umlaut and macron modifiers, represents the abstract
character
.Sq \[u01DE] .
As a side-note, the single codepoint 0x1DE was also assigned to
.Sq \[u01DE] ,
which is a good example for the fact that there can be multiple
representations of a single abstract character in Unicode.
.Pp
Expressing a single abstract character with multiple codepoints solved
the code space exhaustion-problem, and the concept has been greatly
expanded since its first introduction (emojis, joiners, etc.). A sequence
(which can also have the length 1) of codepoints that belong together
this way and represents an abstract character is called a
.Dq grapheme cluster .
.Pp
In many applications it is necessary to count the number of
user-perceived characters, i.e. grapheme clusters, in a string.
A good example for this is a terminal text editor, which needs to
properly align characters on a grid.
This is pretty simple with ASCII-strings, where you just count the number
of bytes (as each byte is a codepoint and each codepoint is a grapheme
cluster).
With Unicode-strings, it is a common mistake to simply adapt the
ASCII-approach and count the number of code points.
This is wrong, as, for example, the sequence
.Dq 0x41 0x308 0x304 ,
while made up of 3 codepoints, is a single grapheme cluster and
represents the user-perceived character
.Sq \[u01DE] .
.Pp
The proper way to segment a string into user-perceived characters
is to segment it into its grapheme clusters by applying the Unicode
grapheme cluster breaking algorithm (UAX #29).
It is based on a complex ruleset and lookup-tables and determines if a
grapheme cluster ends or is continued between two codepoints.
Libraries like ICU and libunistring, which also offer this functionality,
are often bloated, not correct, difficult to use or not reasonably
statically linkable.
.Pp
Analogously, the standard provides algorithms to separate strings by
words, sentences and lines, convert cases and compare strings.
The motivation behind
.Nm
is to make unicode handling suck less and abide by the UNIX philosophy.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laslo Hunhold Aq Mt dev@frign.de
